Working with arrays in
Fortran is really convenient.
I don't think you need any
further evidence of that.
But what to do
when you don't know
how large your arrays are going
to be when you write your code?
Well, that's where dynamic
memory management comes in.
So your application can
ask the operating system
for enough memory
to store the data,
and when it no
longer requires it,
it can just return it
to the operating system.
So that adds quite
a lot of flexibility
to your applications,
and if you do it right,
your application
will at any point
only need such memory as it
requires at that point in time
and not more.
In this application
we want to create
an array of random
numbers, but we
don't know how large
this array is because we
get that from the command line.
There is a subroutine,
get_arguments,
and that will process
the command line
arguments specified by the
user of our application.
And it will initialize
a number of values,
and this number of
values should be the size
of the array which we create.
So how to deal with that?
Well, we declare an array real
with dimension just specified
by a colon That's the
deferred shape array.
And we declare it allocatable.
So we will be able to create
an array of any size we like,
given that it of course
fits in memory at runtime.
And that happens in the
init_values function
to which we just pass
the number of values
that the user specifies when
he runs this application.
The function
init_values get a number
of values, which is just an
integer, as its argument.
And that will be the
size of the array
it returns as a return value.
So the result value
is indeed also
a real array, one-dimensional,
deferred size, and allocatable.
Its name is "values."
The first thing to do is
to allocate the array,
and that happens with
the allocate statement.
So we pass it values with
its size, so nr_values,
and an optional argument stat,
which represents the status.
If the memory allocation
succeeds, the value of status
will be zero.
Otherwise it will be non-zero.
It's quite important
to test for that,
because if the
allocation fails, and you
keep on working with that
array which then has not
been properly allocated, you
will get some weird errors
and they might not
be that easy to find.
So it's very
strongly recommended
to test whether the value
of status is non-zero.
If that's the case, do
some error handling.
In this case, you just
write an error message
to the standard error and
we stop the application.
OK.
If the allocation
succeeded, then we
use the random_number
function on the array
values in order to
initialize the values.
Let's compile the code
and run the application
with, for instance, 100,000
as the number of values.
And as you can see, we
get five times something,
which is really
close to 0.5, which
is, of course, the
expected value when
you sample from a uniform
distribution between 0 and 1.
OK, let's do something more.
Let's run this under
the control of valgrind.
Again with the same
number of values.
Valgrind is a tool that helps
you search for memory problems.
And for instance it
can spot memory leaks,
so basically, memory that is
allocated but that never gets
deallocated.
And as you can see,
we get a heap summary
at the end of the execution.
And that tells us that we've
definitely lost 400,000 bytes.
Now of course in this
particular application,
that's not such a big
deal because the memory
is in use really until the
end of the application.
So it's not that worrying
in this particular case.
But of course it is bad practise
to have an application that
actually has a memory leak.
400,000 bytes, basically
that's 4 times 100,000,
we had an array of size
100,000 that contained
real values, 4 bytes each.
400,000 bytes.
We had five times a call
to the allocate statement.
So five times, we asked
the operating system
for 400,000 bytes.
And four times, things
were OK in the sense
that that memory which we
borrowed from the operating
system was returned to
the operating system.
But not the last time.
So basically, we
kept hold of 400,000
bytes up to the end
of the application,
although we strictly
speaking didn't need that.
It's very good practise if
you have an allocate statement
to have a deallocate
statement paired with it.
So as soon as you're done with
the memory which you requested
from the operating
system, just give it back
by using a deallocate statement,
as we'll see in a minute.
So we can fix this by adding a
deallocate statement at the end
of the do loop after it's done.
So when we compile
this code and we run it
again under control
of valgrind, then you
see that we now get a
clean bill of health.
So basically, the heap summary
says that at exit, no bytes are
in use, 0 bytes in 0 blocks.
So that actually
solved our problem.
Now all memory that has been
allocated by the application
is also properly deallocated.
If we change our programme just
a little bit, then actually,
the situation gets worse.
We can point to a location
in memory using a pointer.
So that's basically a name
for a memory location.
You could view it as
a sort of an alias.
So we have a real
dimension pointer values.
So now values will be a pointer
to a one dimensional array
of deferred shape
of real values.
And we make values point to
the result of init_values
using the arrow
operator, as you can see.
We'll talk in much more detail
about pointers later on.
But for now, just consider it
to be an alias for some memory
location.
Let's compile and
run the application
under control of valgrind.
And as you can
see, now actually,
the situation is much worse.
We've lost 1,600,000 bytes,
so basically four times
the amount we had before.
And this is of course
much worse now.
We really have a
memory leak because we
lost all those bytes, and
there is at this point
no way of recovering it.
And this was during the
runtime of our application.
So if this would have been
a long running application,
we would have seen increased
memory usage while it's
actually not at all required.
Because at each
given point in time,
we only need 400,000
bytes, while the memory
usage of the application
grew from 400,000 to 800,000
to 1,200,000 to 1,600,000 bytes.
And in the last iteration of the
do loop, even 2,000,000 bytes.
So this is really a
very bad situation,
and we would definitely
have to fix this.
We got into that situation
because we didn't
do our bookkeeping right.
So in each iteration
of the do loop,
we do an allocation in
the function init_values,
but we didn't do a deallocation,
corresponding deallocation.
So if we do a deallocation
in each iteration of the
do loop, then actually,
our problem is solved.
Let's compile the
application and run it
under control of valgrind.
And as you see again, we get
a very clean bill of health.
So 0 bytes used when
the application exits.
So our memory leak is solved.
And this is the
proper way to do it
because the lifetime
of the allocated memory
is just a single
iteration of the do loop.
So if we deallocate at
the end of the iteration,
then we don't have
any memory leaks.
What happens if we do
too many deallocations?
So let's add an
additional deallocation
at the end of the do loop,
so after that finished,
and see what happens.
As you can see,
we have a problem.
So we get a runtime
error, an attempt
of deallocating
unallocated "values."
So that is definitely a problem.
So you shouldn't do
a double deallocation
because that will indeed
result in a runtime error.
Doing the bookkeeping
right is very important.
Always pair an allocate
with a single deallocate
at some point in the code.
And note that the
allocation was done
in the function,
and the deallocation
in the main program where
that data was actually used.
So dynamic memory
management is quite useful,
and we'll see some
more applications
when we talk about interesting
data structures later on.
It's just a matter
of bookkeeping.
If you do the bookkeeping right,
it's actually straightforward
and you don't have any trouble.
Don't forget to
do a deallocation.
Don't do a double deallocation.
But apart from that,
it's fairly easy.